---
categories:
- interview
layout: book
title: Molestar.org - Disturbing with critical irony
created: 1372541568
---
*Molestar = Means to disturb in spanish, but...
*Mašta: Why to disturb?*
*Molestar:* We saw a sticker on the street saying "malestar"(in spanish that means “uneasiness/discomfort/unrest”) but we read it like “molestar” (“disturb/annoy/bother”) and we realized that was a good name for a collective. We started to think about what kind of activities such a collective would carry out. To answer this question we started to experiment with this concept and registered the domain molestar.org and then came the first actions.
<!--more-->
<p><strong><strong>Mašta: To d</strong>isturb in general or a more specific form?</strong></p>
<p><strong>Molestar</strong>: Specifically to disrupt concrete events. Like sabotaging the opening of an exhibition that used a horse as an artist or creating a colouring book about dumpster-diving for children. Questioning things that catch our attention.<br>
	&nbsp;<br>
	<strong><strong>Mašta: </strong>Can us disturb anywhere?</strong></p>
<p><strong>Molestar</strong>: Molestar.org is generated by the anger you feel in the city and the unjust society.<br>
	If you get away from all this geographically and disappear in time, living in a metaphysical bubble, you can find particles everywhere, even inside. Rage is transformed into creative energy that you express or you can keep it in a closed box. From little seeds lettuce sprouts faster than you can imagine and you can find eggs everywhere. Are we annoying you already?</p>
<p><strong><strong>Mašta: </strong>Do you have any prefered resources to use?</strong></p>
<p><strong>Molestar</strong>: Critical irony. We believe that things arrive softer with humour and go deeper thence.</p>
<p><strong><strong>Mašta: </strong>What kind of response have you gotten from your annoyance activities?</strong></p>
<p><strong>Molestar</strong>: From those who we bother: quarells, persecutions and hard feelings. From those who think like us: encouragement to keep going.</p>
<p><strong><strong>Mašta: </strong>Do you identify yourself with the concept “for free” or do you prefer to link it to something different in relation (speaker/recipient), something fairer?</strong></p>
<p><strong>Molestar</strong>: Point "0", neither spend nor gain. Compensated.</p>
<p><strong><strong>Mašta: </strong>How do you articulate this "for free" concept , with the street, exhibition spaces and publications?</strong></p>
<p><strong>Molestar</strong>: We always try to look for alternative financial resources for activities (exhibitions in squatted spaces, self publishing without intermediaries, street actions, etc).</p>
<p><strong><strong>Mašta: </strong>You've moved away from the squat movement in Barcelona to live in the rural area of Asturias, a region in the north of Spain with the objective to look for new forms of self-subsistence. What was the purpouse of the geografic change for this life project?</strong></p>
<p><strong>Molestar</strong>: In the countryside there is a different perception of time than in the city. There are other tools and ways of acting.</p>
<p><strong><strong>Mašta: </strong>What do you think about making a creative activism manual?</strong></p>
<p><strong>Molestar</strong>: What is creative activism?</p>
